+++
date = '2025-06-23T11:14:19+05:30'
draft = false
title = 'Audio Cloning'

readTime = true
autonumber = true
tags = ["Python", "OpenVoice", "Melo TTS"]
showTags = true
hideBackToTop = true

parent = "projects"
ancestor = "projects"
+++

This is an extension of the [Video Translator](/projects/video-translator) tool that generates cloned audio for short subtitles, improving the quality of audio output. The tool uses the [OpenVoice](https://github.com/myshell-ai/OpenVoice) and [Melo TTS](https://github.com/myshell-ai/MeloTTS) libraries to clone the audio output generated by the video translator tool.

Challenges faced while integrating audio cloning:
1. **Library Compatibility**: The libraries were not functional on Python 3.12, which I was using. They worked on Python 3.10, so including the TTS logic in the same script was not possible.
2. **Short Subtitles**: The libraries needed a longer sample audio to clone the voice better. Some of the subtitles were short, leading to errors in generating the audio for those subtitles. I cloned the OpenVoice repository and updated the checks that required longer audio samples. I also added a check to skip the subtitles that were too short.

Fixes:
- The `openvoice/se_extractor.py` had a check that to avoid saving audio segments which are shorter than 1.5 seconds. Some of the words like `hello`, `hi`, `bye` were shorter than that. I updated the check to allow audio segments which are shorter than 0.5 seconds as well.
- Since the `openvoice` library had explicitly mentioned in the documentation to install melo-tts, I included it in the requirements.txt file.
- Added a script where I can configure the path or `video-translator` tool output folder and run the audio cloning logic on all the audio files generated by the video translator tool.

The fork is available at [OpenVoice](https://github.com/pratts/OpenVoice) in case you want to use it in your own projects. The `test1.py` file can be used to clone the audio output generated by the video translator tool.